working-with-your-data: Adding FileZilla instructions for non-small files (#20)
AlexsLemonade/2020-june-training: working-with-your-data/working-with-your-own-data.md

```
Using the `--ask-password` will prompt you to enter your password.

### Upload large files (> 1Gb) from your own computer

#### Install FileZilla

> Go to [FileZilla's website](https://filezilla-project.org/download.php?type=client) to download the FileZilla Client for your respective operating system.

Reviewer: Taking notes as I go here - when I follow this link and it detects (presumably) my OS as Linux 64bit, that page says

> Built for Debian 10.0 (Buster) 64bit edition. It is highly recommended to use the package management system of your distribution or to manually compile FileZilla if you are running a different flavour of Linux.

So one can use Ubuntu Software Center (for Ubuntu, but that's the only thing I'm testing) or the command line ([ref](https://www.computernetworkingnotes.com/linux-tutorials/how-to-install-filezilla-ftp-client-in-ubuntu.html)).

Click the big green `Download` button.

Click `Download` on this next page for `FileZilla` this is the only free option but will have the functionality you need.

<img src="screenshots/filezilla-download.png">

> After download is complete, you'll find the `FileZilla_3.48.1_<OPERATING_SYSTEM_TAG>.app.tar.bz2` in your download files or you can click on it in the corner of your web browser's screen.

Author: ```suggestion
After download is complete, you'll find the `FileZilla_` file in your download files or you can click on it in the corner of your web browser's screen.
On a Mac, this will be a a `.app.tar.bz2`, on a Windows, it will be a `.exe` file. 
```

> Double click on the file to install.

Author: ```suggestion
Double click on the file to install.
On a *Mac*, you may want to move the App file to where your other applications are stored but you'll otherwise be done with installation.

On a *Windows*, you'll be asked if you want to `Allow FileZilla to make changes` click `Yes`.  
There will be a series of steps you need to click `Next` and `Accept` to them.

<img src="screenshots/filezilla-windows.png" width=600>
```

```
Using the `--ask-password` will prompt you to enter your password.

### Upload large files (> 1Gb) from your own computer

#### Install FileZilla

Go to [FileZilla's website](https://filezilla-project.org/download.php?type=client) to download the FileZilla Client for your respective operating system.

Click the big green `Download` button.

Click `Download` on this next page for `FileZilla` this is the only free option but will have the functionality you need.

<img src="screenshots/filezilla-download.png">

After download is complete, you'll find the `FileZilla_` file in your download files or you can click on it in the corner of your web browser's screen.

> On a Mac, this will be a a `.app.tar.bz2`, on a Windows, it will be a `.exe` file. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On a Mac, this will be a `.app.tar.bz2` file. On Windows, it will be a `.exe` file. 
```

Reviewer: I think keeping Mac and Windows instructions in brief separate sections (under a bold line **Mac** if you don't want it to be included in the TOC) could be useful here, rather than having them kinda blended together.

Author: Yup. I was kinda thinking about that, but now that you've said, it I will do that.

Double click on the file to install.
On a *Mac*, you may want to move the App file to where your other applications are stored but you'll otherwise be done with installation.

> On a *Windows*, you'll be asked if you want to `Allow FileZilla to make changes` click `Yes`.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On *Windows*, you'll be asked if you want to `Allow FileZilla to make changes` click `Yes`.  
```
or "Windows computer" - not sure why "On a Windows" feels incorrect to me (I may be wrong)

For `Password` type in the password you use to login in to our RStudio server.  
For `Port`, type in `22`.  

Then click the blue `Quickconnect` button.
FileZilla may ask you if you want it to remember your passwords.
We'd suggest creating a master password or using `Do not save password`.

<img src="screenshots/filezilla-password.png" width=500>

Next, FileZilla will ask you if you should trust our RStudio Server.
You can check the box for `Always trust this host` if you don't want to be asked this again.
Then click `OK`.

<img src="screenshots/filezilla-trust-server.png" width=500>

#### Using FileZilla to upload files to the RStudio Server

The left side of the FileZilla screen is the file/folder you'd like to upload and the right side is where in the RStudio Server you'd like to upload to.

On the right side, click on the folder you'd like to upload the files to in the RStudio Server.

Then, on the left, navigate to the file or folder on your computer you'd like to upload the RStudio Server.
You may be asked to allow FileZilla to have access to your files.
Click `OK` for each time.

<img src="screenshots/filezilla-permission.png" width=400>

> For the folder or file you want to upload, right click on it and choose `Upload`.

Reviewer: I think double-clicking just works :tm: FWIW (don't think we need to make a change)

<img src="screenshots/filezilla-bar.png">

For `Host`, type in `rstudio.ccdatalab.org`.  
For `Username`, type in the username you use to login in to our RStudio server.  
For `Password` type in the password you use to login in to our RStudio server.  
For `Port`, type in `22`.  

Then click the blue `Quickconnect` button.
FileZilla may ask you if you want it to remember your passwords.
We'd suggest creating a master password or using `Do not save password`.

<img src="screenshots/filezilla-password.png" width=500>

Next, FileZilla will ask you if you should trust our RStudio Server.
You can check the box for `Always trust this host` if you don't want to be asked this again.
Then click `OK`.

<img src="screenshots/filezilla-trust-server.png" width=500>

#### Using FileZilla to upload files to the RStudio Server

The left side of the FileZilla screen is the file/folder you'd like to upload and the right side is where in the RStudio Server you'd like to upload to.

On the right side, click on the folder you'd like to upload the files to in the RStudio Server.

Then, on the left, navigate to the file or folder on your computer you'd like to upload the RStudio Server.

> You may be asked to allow FileZilla to have access to your files.

Author: ```suggestion
On a Mac, you will likely be asked to allow FileZilla to have access to your files.
```

Click `OK` for each time.

> <img src="screenshots/filezilla-permission.png" width=400>

Reviewer: Would you consider this part Mac-specific?

Author: From my experimenting it seemed it was.

Reviewer: Can we write “on a Mac” in that case? I did not have any permissions issue/step on Ubuntu.

```
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install filezilla
```

#### Linking FileZilla to the RStudio Server

Open up the FileZilla application.
At the top of the FileZilla screen, you can enter in the address and your credentials for our RStudio Server (send a message to one of our staff if you forgot your username or password).

<img src="screenshots/filezilla-bar.png">

For `Host`, type in `rstudio.ccdatalab.org`.  
For `Username`, type in the username you use to login in to our RStudio server.  
For `Password` type in the password you use to login in to our RStudio server.  
For `Port`, type in `22`.  

Then click the blue `Quickconnect` button.
FileZilla may ask you if you want it to remember your passwords.
We'd suggest creating a master password or using `Do not save password`.

<img src="screenshots/filezilla-password.png" width=500>

Next, FileZilla will ask you if you should trust our RStudio Server.
You can check the box for `Always trust this host` if you don't want to be asked this again.
Then click `OK`.

<img src="screenshots/filezilla-trust-server.png" width=500>

#### Using FileZilla to upload files to the RStudio Server

> The left side of the FileZilla screen is the file/folder you'd like to upload and the right side is where in the RStudio Server you'd like to upload to.

Reviewer 2: I think this can be simplified a bit, and I think it is worth saying what the default location is.
```suggestion
The left side of the FileZilla window shows the files and folders on your computer and the right side shows the files and folders on the RStudio Server, defaulting to show the folders in your "Home" folder (which has the same name as your username). 
```

> On the right side, click on the folder you'd like to upload the files to in the RStudio Server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On the right side, navigate to the folder you'd like to upload the files to on the RStudio Server.
```

Then, on the left, navigate to the file or folder on your computer you'd like to upload the RStudio Server.
On a Mac, you will likely be asked to allow FileZilla to have access to your files.
Click `OK` for each time.

<img src="screenshots/filezilla-permission.png" width=400>

For the folder or file you want to upload, right click on it and choose `Upload`.
A progress bar on the bottom of the screen will tell you approximately how long it will take to upload.

> 

Reviewer 2: We might want to add here that this may also be useful for downloading result files. We talk about using the file browser in RStudio, but this may be faster for many cases, and if they have already figured it out for uploads, they might be in a good position to use it for downloads too.

In either situation you will likely be prompted to enter your password.
You can enter it interactively; it's best to not have the password written in a script.

## Upload large files (> 1Gb) from your own computer

FileZilla is a GUI that helps transfer local files to remote servers like our RStudio Server.

> We recommend setting up FileZilla if your dataset is larger than a Gb or if you will want to be transferring files back and forth to the RStudio Server. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend setting up FileZilla if your dataset is larger than a Gb or if you will transfer files to and from the RStudio Server. 
```

In either situation you will likely be prompted to enter your password.
You can enter it interactively; it's best to not have the password written in a script.

## Upload large files (> 1Gb) from your own computer

> 

Reviewer: Add a sentence (or two) about what FileZilla is

<img src="screenshots/filezilla-download-install.png">

After download is complete, you'll find the `FileZilla`'s `.app.tar.bz2` file in your download files or you can click on it in the corner of your web browser's screen.
Double click on the file to install.

You may want to move the App file to where your other applications are stored.

### Install FileZilla on Windows

Go to [FileZilla's website](https://filezilla-project.org/download.php?type=client) to download the FileZilla Client.

Click the big green `Download` button.

Click `Download` on this next page for `FileZilla` this is the only free option but will have the functionality you need.

<img src="screenshots/filezilla-download-install.png">

After download is complete, you'll find the `FileZilla` `.exe` file in your download files or you can click on it in the corner of your web browser's screen.

Double click on the file to install to begin installation.

You'll be asked if you want to `Allow FileZilla to make changes` click `Yes`.  

There will be a series of steps (like below) you need to click `Next` and `Accept` to them.

> <img src="screenshots/filezilla-windows.png" width=600>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<img src="screenshots/filezilla-windows.png" width="600">
```

### Install FileZilla on Ubuntu

Navigate to the Ubuntu Software Center and search for FileZilla.
Select FileZilla and then click the `Install` button.

Alternatively, you can install FileZilla via the command line with:

```
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install filezilla
```

### Linking FileZilla to the RStudio Server

Open up the FileZilla application.
At the top of the FileZilla screen, you can enter in the address and your credentials for our RStudio Server (send a message to one of our staff if you forgot your username or password).

<img src="screenshots/filezilla-bar.png">

For `Host`, type in `rstudio.ccdatalab.org`.  
For `Username`, type in the username you use to login in to our RStudio server.  
For `Password` type in the password you use to login in to our RStudio server.  
For `Port`, type in `22`.  

Then click the blue `Quickconnect` button.
FileZilla may ask you if you want it to remember your passwords.
We'd suggest creating a master password or using `Do not save password`.

> <img src="screenshots/filezilla-password.png" width=500>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<img src="screenshots/filezilla-password.png" width="500">
```

Next, FileZilla will ask you if you should trust our RStudio Server.
You can check the box for `Always trust this host` if you don't want to be asked this again.
Then click `OK`.

> <img src="screenshots/filezilla-trust-server.png" width=500>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<img src="screenshots/filezilla-trust-server.png" width="500">
```

### Using FileZilla to upload files to the RStudio Server

The left side of the FileZilla window shows the files and folders on your computer and the right side shows the files and folders on the RStudio Server, defaulting to show the folders in your "Home" folder (which has the same name as your username).

On the right side, navigate to the folder you'd like to upload the files to on the RStudio Server.

Then, on the left, navigate to the file or folder on your computer you'd like to upload the RStudio Server.
On a Mac, you will likely be asked to allow FileZilla to have access to your files.
Click `OK` for each time.

> <img src="screenshots/filezilla-permission.png" width=400>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<img src="screenshots/filezilla-permission.png" width="400">
```

For the folder or file you want to upload, right click on it and choose `Upload`.

> <img src="screenshots/filezilla-upload.png" width=400>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<img src="screenshots/filezilla-upload.png" width="400">
```

A progress bar on the bottom of the screen will tell you approximately how long it will take to upload.

### Using FileZilla to download files to your computer

The left side of the FileZilla window shows the files and folders on your computer and the right side shows the files and folders on the RStudio Server, defaulting to show the folders in your "Home" folder (which has the same name as your username).

On the left side, navigate to the folder you'd like to download the files to on your computer.

Then, on the right, navigate to the file or folder on the RStudio Server you'd like to download to your computer.

For the folder or file you want to download, right click on it and choose `Download`.

> <img src="screenshots/filezilla-download.png" width=400>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<img src="screenshots/filezilla-download.png" width="400">
```

Your computer may show the file in the bottom left of your browser window.
You are likely to find your files in your `Downloads` folder!

> ## Read the data into your R environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Read the data into your R environment
```

Reviewer: What's the rationale for adding this section? In it's current state, I don't know how helpful it would be.

Author: I'll delete it. It's not very helpful as of now and I think the next steps should be more clear through the curriculum.

Reviewer: Yea I think the options are really lean in and add a lot of detail (hopefully unnecessary because of the curriculum) or remove it.

This step is very dependent on the format of your data and what you are planning to do with it!
If your file is a TSV, CSV, or RDS file, follow the examples in the `intro-to-R-tidyverse/intro-to-tidyverse.Rmd` notebook.

> We do NOT recommend clicking on the file in the RStudio panel to load it into your R environment, this typically won't work for anything that's not a very small file.

Reviewer: I don't know what that means. I think you mean the import dataset button in the Environment pane, but this is written like you're talking about the Files pane, which will open text files up as a text file in the Source pane, not load them into the environment. For RDS files, clicking them in the Files pane will bring up a prompt for loading them into the environment.

Author: I'll delete this whole section anyway. Seems not that helpful.
